README.md, before:

# Real-Time E-Commerce Demo

This app demonstrates the real-time incremental computation capabilities of Materialize in the context of an e-commerce website.

**An e-commerce business wants to understand:**

- **Order trends** throughout the day to discern patterns.
- **What is selling the most?**
  - Understand supply/demand and manage inventory.
  - Show inventory status in the website to encourage users to buy.
- **Conversion Funnel:** Effectiveness of the website in converting pageviews to actual buys.
- **Low-stock Alerts:** Generate alerts and automatically place orders to the warehouse if a specific item is close to running out of stock

We'll build materialized views that answer most of the questions by providing data in a [business intelligence dashboard](#business-intelligence-metabase), and we'll pipe data out to a [graphQL API](#graphql-api-postgraphile) to provide answers to the other questions.

To generate the data we'll simulate **users**, **items**, **purchases** and **pageviews** on a fictional e-commerce website.

To simplify deploying all of this infrastructure, the demo is enclosed in a series of Docker images glued together via Docker Compose. As a secondary benefit, you can run the demo via Linux, an EC2 VM instance, or a Mac laptop.

The [docker-compose file](docker-compose.yml) spins up containers with the following names, connections and roles:
![Shop demo infra](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11527560/111649810-18e23e80-87db-11eb-96c0-6518ef7b87ba.png)

## What to Expect

Our load generator (`loadgen`) is a [python script](loadgen/generate_load.py) that does two things:

1. It seeds MySQL with `item`, `user` and `purchase` tables, and then begins rapidly adding `purchase` rows that join an item and a user. _(~10 per second)_
2. It simultaneously begins sending JSON-encoded `pageview` events directly to kafka. _(~750 per second)_

As the database writes occur, Debezium/Kafka stream the changes out of MySQL. Materialize subscribes to this change feed and maintains our materialized views with the incoming data––materialized views typically being some report whose information we're regularly interested in viewing.

For example, if we wanted real time statistics of total pageviews and orders by item, Materialize could maintain that report as a materialized view. And, in fact,
that is exactly what this demo will show.

## Prepping Mac Laptops

If you're on a Mac laptop, you might want to increase the amount of memory
available to Docker Engine.

1. From the Docker Desktop menu bar app, select **Preferences**.
1. Go to the **Advanced** tab.
1. Select at least **8 GiB** of **Memory**.
1. Click **Apply and Restart**.

## Running the Demo

You'll need to have [docker and docker-compose installed](https://materialize.com/docs/third-party/docker) before getting started.

1. Bring up the Docker Compose containers in the background:

    ```shell session
    docker-compose up -d
    ```

    **This may take several minutes to complete the first time you run it.** If all goes well, you'll have everything running in their own containers, with Debezium configured to ship changes from MySQL into Kafka.

2. Launch the Materialize CLI.

    ```shell session
    docker-compose run mzcli
    ```

     _(This is just a shortcut to a docker container with postgres-client pre-installed, if you already have psql you could run `psql -U materialize -h localhost -p 6875 materialize`)_

3. Now that you're in the Materialize CLI, define all of the tables in `mysql.shop` as Kafka sources:

    ```sql
    CREATE SOURCE purchases
    FROM KAFKA BROKER 'kafka:9092' TOPIC 'mysql.shop.purchases'
    FORMAT AVRO USING CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY 'http://schema-registry:8081'
    ENVELOPE DEBEZIUM;

    CREATE SOURCE items
    FROM KAFKA BROKER 'kafka:9092' TOPIC 'mysql.shop.items'
    FORMAT AVRO USING CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY 'http://schema-registry:8081'
    ENVELOPE DEBEZIUM;

    CREATE SOURCE users
    FROM KAFKA BROKER 'kafka:9092' TOPIC 'mysql.shop.users'
    FORMAT AVRO USING CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY 'http://schema-registry:8081'
    ENVELOPE DEBEZIUM;
    ```

    Because these sources are pulling message schema data from the registry, materialize knows the column types to use for each attribute.

4. We'll also want to create a JSON-formatted source for the pageviews:

    ```sql
    CREATE SOURCE json_pageviews
    FROM KAFKA BROKER 'kafka:9092' TOPIC 'pageviews'
    FORMAT BYTES;
    ```

    With JSON-formatted messages, we don't know the schema so the [JSON is pulled in as raw bytes](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/create-source/json-kafka/) and we still need to CAST data into the proper columns and types. We'll show that in the step below.

    Now if you run `SHOW SOURCES;` in the CLI, you should see the four sources we created:

    ```
    materialize=> SHOW SOURCES;
        name      
    ----------------
    items
    json_pageviews
    purchases
    users
    (4 rows)

    materialize=> 
    ```

5. Next we will create our first Materialized View, summarizing pageviews by item:

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW item_pageviews AS
        SELECT
        (regexp_match((data->'url')::STRING, '/products/(\d+)')[1])::INT AS item_id,
        COUNT(*) as pageviews
        FROM (
        SELECT CAST(data AS jsonb) AS data
        FROM (
            SELECT convert_from(data, 'utf8') AS data
            FROM json_pageviews
        )) GROUP BY 1;
    ```

    As you can see here, we are doing a couple extra steps to get the pageview data into the format we need:

    1. We are converting from raw bytes to utf8 encoded text to [jsonb](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/types/jsonb/#main):

       ```sql
       SELECT CAST(data AS jsonb) AS data
        FROM (
            SELECT convert_from(data, 'utf8') AS data
            FROM json_pageviews
        )
        ```

    2. We are using postgres JSON notation (`data->'url'`), type casts (`::STRING`) and [regexp_match](<https://materialize.com/docs/sql/functions/#string-func:~:text=regexp_match(haystack>) function to extract only the item_id from the raw pageview URL.

       ```sql
       (regexp_match((data->'url')::STRING, '/products/(\d+)')[1])::INT AS item_id,
       ```

6. Now if you select results from the view, you should see data populating:

    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM item_pageviews ORDER BY pageviews DESC LIMIT 10;
    ```

    If you re-run it a few times you should see the pageview counts changing as new data comes in and gets materialized in real time.

7. Let's create some more materialized views:

    **Purchase Summary:**

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW purchase_summary AS 
        SELECT
            item_id,
            SUM(purchase_price) as revenue,
            COUNT(id) AS orders,
            SUM(quantity) AS items_sold
        FROM purchases GROUP BY 1;
    ```

    **Item Summary:** _(Using purchase summary and pageview summary internally)_

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW item_summary AS
        SELECT
            items.name,
            purchase_summary.items_sold,
            purchase_summary.orders,
            purchase_summary.revenue,
            item_pageviews.pageviews,
            CASE WHEN item_pageviews.pageviews IS NULL THEN 0.0 ELSE purchase_summary.orders / item_pageviews.pageviews::FLOAT END AS conversion_rate
        FROM items
        JOIN purchase_summary ON purchase_summary.item_id = items.id
        JOIN item_pageviews ON item_pageviews.item_id = items.id;
    ```

    This view shows some of the JOIN capabilities of Materialize, we're joining our two previous views with items to create a summary of purchases, pageviews, and conversion rates.

    If you select from `item_summary` you can see the results in real-time:

    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM item_summary ORDER BY conversion_rate DESC LIMIT 10;
    ```

    **Remaining Stock:** This view joins items and (all purchases created _after_ an item's inventory was updated) and creates a column that subtracts quantity_sold from inventory to get a live in-stock count.

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW remaining_stock AS
        SELECT
          items.id as item_id,
          MAX(items.inventory) - SUM(purchases.quantity) AS remaining_stock
        FROM items
        JOIN purchases ON purchases.item_id = items.id AND purchases.created_at > items.inventory_updated_at
        GROUP BY items.id;
    ```

    **Trending Items:** Here we are doing a bit of a hack because Materialize doesn't yet support window functions like `RANK`. So instead we are doing a self join on `purchase_summary` and counting up the items with _more purchases than the current item_ to get a basic "trending" rank datapoint.

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW trending_items AS
        SELECT
            p1.item_id,
            SUM(CASE WHEN p2.items_sold > p1.items_sold THEN 1 ELSE 0 END) as trend_rank
        FROM purchase_summary p1
        FULL JOIN purchase_summary p2 ON 1 = 1
        GROUP BY 1;
    ```

    Lastly, let's bring the trending items and remaining stock views together to expose to our graphql API:

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW item_metadata AS
        SELECT
            rs.item_id as id, rs.remaining_stock, ti.trend_rank
        FROM remaining_stock rs
        JOIN trending_items ti ON ti.item_id = rs.item_id;
    ```

    Now if you run `SHOW VIEWS;` you should see all the views we just created:

    ```
    materialize=> SHOW VIEWS;
       name       
    ------------------
    item_metadata
    item_pageviews
    item_summary
    purchase_summary
    remaining_stock
    trending_items
    (6 rows)
    ```

8. Now you've materialized some views that we can use in a business intelligence tool, metabase, and in a graphQL API (postgraphile.) Close out of the Materialize CLI (<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>D</kbd>).

## Business Intelligence: Metabase

1. In a browser, go to <localhost:3030> _(or <IP_ADDRESS:3030> if running on a VM)._

2. Click **Let's get started**.

3. Complete the first set of fields asking for your email address. This
    information isn't crucial for anything but does have to be filled in.

4. On the **Add your data** page, fill in the following information:

    Field             | Enter...
    ----------------- | ----------------
    Database          | **Materialize**
    Name              | **shop**
    Host              | **materialized**
    Port              | **6875**
    Database name     | **materialize**
    Database username | **materialize**
    Database password | Leave empty.

5. Proceed past the screens until you reach your primary dashboard.

6. Click **Ask a question**.

7. Click **Native query**.

8. From **Select a database**, select **shop**.

9. In the query editor, enter:

    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM item_summary ORDER BY conversion_rate DESC;
    ```

10. You can save the output and add it to a dashboard, once you've drafted a dashboard you can manually set the refresh rate to 1 second by adding `#refresh=1` to the end of the URL, here is an example of a real-time dashboard of top-viewed items and top converting items:
![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11527560/111679085-5228a780-87f7-11eb-86c5-34bf7b6cdcfb.gif)

## GraphQL API: Postgraphile

Postgraphile is running as middleware that connects to materialize (as if it were a postgres database) and exposes a graphql API to port 5000.

1. In a browser, go to <localhost:5000/graphiql> _(or <IP_ADDRESS:5000/graphiql> if running on a VM)._
2. This exposes an interactive UI for composing and creating graphql queries, you can use the toggles on the sidebar to create your own query, or you can paste one in like:

```graphql
query MyQuery {
allItemMetadata(first: 10, orderBy: TREND_RANK_ASC) {
    edges {
    node {
        id
        remainingStock
        trendRank
    }
    }
}
}
```

This query is fetching from our realtime materialized view called `item_metadata` and grabbing the top 10 items by trend_rank.

![postgraphile](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11527560/111680390-8c467900-87f8-11eb-940a-3c95fd7792d2.png)

## Conclusion

You now have materialize doing real-time materialized views on a changefeed from a database and pageview events from kafka. You have complex multi-layer views doing JOIN's and aggregations in order to distill the raw data into a form that's useful for downstream applications: metabase and graphQL.

In metabase, you have the ability to create dashboards and reports using the real-time data. And you can use the graphQL API to query real-time data from your website or other client applications.

You have a lot of infrastructure running in docker containers, don't forget to run `docker-compose down` to shut everything down!

Commit message:

add git clone starter instruction

README.md, after:

# Real-Time E-Commerce Demo

This app demonstrates the real-time incremental computation capabilities of Materialize in the context of an e-commerce website.

**An e-commerce business wants to understand:**

- **Order trends** throughout the day to discern patterns.
- **What is selling the most?**
  - Understand supply/demand and manage inventory.
  - Show inventory status in the website to encourage users to buy.
- **Conversion Funnel:** Effectiveness of the website in converting pageviews to actual buys.
- **Low-stock Alerts:** Generate alerts and automatically place orders to the warehouse if a specific item is close to running out of stock

We'll build materialized views that answer most of the questions by providing data in a [business intelligence dashboard](#business-intelligence-metabase), and we'll pipe data out to a [graphQL API](#graphql-api-postgraphile) to provide answers to the other questions.

To generate the data we'll simulate **users**, **items**, **purchases** and **pageviews** on a fictional e-commerce website.

To simplify deploying all of this infrastructure, the demo is enclosed in a series of Docker images glued together via Docker Compose. As a secondary benefit, you can run the demo via Linux, an EC2 VM instance, or a Mac laptop.

The [docker-compose file](docker-compose.yml) spins up containers with the following names, connections and roles:
![Shop demo infra](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11527560/111649810-18e23e80-87db-11eb-96c0-6518ef7b87ba.png)

## What to Expect

Our load generator (`loadgen`) is a [python script](loadgen/generate_load.py) that does two things:

1. It seeds MySQL with `item`, `user` and `purchase` tables, and then begins rapidly adding `purchase` rows that join an item and a user. _(~10 per second)_
2. It simultaneously begins sending JSON-encoded `pageview` events directly to kafka. _(~750 per second)_

As the database writes occur, Debezium/Kafka stream the changes out of MySQL. Materialize subscribes to this change feed and maintains our materialized views with the incoming data––materialized views typically being some report whose information we're regularly interested in viewing.

For example, if we wanted real time statistics of total pageviews and orders by item, Materialize could maintain that report as a materialized view. And, in fact,
that is exactly what this demo will show.

## Prepping Mac Laptops

If you're on a Mac laptop, you might want to increase the amount of memory
available to Docker Engine.

1. From the Docker Desktop menu bar app, select **Preferences**.
1. Go to the **Advanced** tab.
1. Select at least **8 GiB** of **Memory**.
1. Click **Apply and Restart**.

## Running the Demo

You'll need to have [docker and docker-compose installed](https://materialize.com/docs/third-party/docker) before getting started.

1. Clone this repo and navigate to the directory by running:

   ```shell session
   git clone https://github.com/MaterializeInc/ecommerce-demo.git
   cd ecommerce-demo
   ```

2. Bring up the Docker Compose containers in the background:

    ```shell session
    docker-compose up -d
    ```

    **This may take several minutes to complete the first time you run it.** If all goes well, you'll have everything running in their own containers, with Debezium configured to ship changes from MySQL into Kafka.

3. Launch the Materialize CLI.

    ```shell session
    docker-compose run mzcli
    ```

     _(This is just a shortcut to a docker container with postgres-client pre-installed, if you already have psql you could run `psql -U materialize -h localhost -p 6875 materialize`)_

4. Now that you're in the Materialize CLI, define all of the tables in `mysql.shop` as Kafka sources:

    ```sql
    CREATE SOURCE purchases
    FROM KAFKA BROKER 'kafka:9092' TOPIC 'mysql.shop.purchases'
    FORMAT AVRO USING CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY 'http://schema-registry:8081'
    ENVELOPE DEBEZIUM;

    CREATE SOURCE items
    FROM KAFKA BROKER 'kafka:9092' TOPIC 'mysql.shop.items'
    FORMAT AVRO USING CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY 'http://schema-registry:8081'
    ENVELOPE DEBEZIUM;

    CREATE SOURCE users
    FROM KAFKA BROKER 'kafka:9092' TOPIC 'mysql.shop.users'
    FORMAT AVRO USING CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY 'http://schema-registry:8081'
    ENVELOPE DEBEZIUM;
    ```

    Because these sources are pulling message schema data from the registry, materialize knows the column types to use for each attribute.

5. We'll also want to create a JSON-formatted source for the pageviews:

    ```sql
    CREATE SOURCE json_pageviews
    FROM KAFKA BROKER 'kafka:9092' TOPIC 'pageviews'
    FORMAT BYTES;
    ```

    With JSON-formatted messages, we don't know the schema so the [JSON is pulled in as raw bytes](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/create-source/json-kafka/) and we still need to CAST data into the proper columns and types. We'll show that in the step below.

    Now if you run `SHOW SOURCES;` in the CLI, you should see the four sources we created:

    ```
    materialize=> SHOW SOURCES;
        name      
    ----------------
    items
    json_pageviews
    purchases
    users
    (4 rows)

    materialize=> 
    ```

6. Next we will create our first Materialized View, summarizing pageviews by item:

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW item_pageviews AS
        SELECT
        (regexp_match((data->'url')::STRING, '/products/(\d+)')[1])::INT AS item_id,
        COUNT(*) as pageviews
        FROM (
        SELECT CAST(data AS jsonb) AS data
        FROM (
            SELECT convert_from(data, 'utf8') AS data
            FROM json_pageviews
        )) GROUP BY 1;
    ```

    As you can see here, we are doing a couple extra steps to get the pageview data into the format we need:

    1. We are converting from raw bytes to utf8 encoded text to [jsonb](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/types/jsonb/#main):

       ```sql
       SELECT CAST(data AS jsonb) AS data
        FROM (
            SELECT convert_from(data, 'utf8') AS data
            FROM json_pageviews
        )
        ```

    2. We are using postgres JSON notation (`data->'url'`), type casts (`::STRING`) and [regexp_match](<https://materialize.com/docs/sql/functions/#string-func:~:text=regexp_match(haystack>) function to extract only the item_id from the raw pageview URL.

       ```sql
       (regexp_match((data->'url')::STRING, '/products/(\d+)')[1])::INT AS item_id,
       ```

7. Now if you select results from the view, you should see data populating:

    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM item_pageviews ORDER BY pageviews DESC LIMIT 10;
    ```

    If you re-run it a few times you should see the pageview counts changing as new data comes in and gets materialized in real time.

8. Let's create some more materialized views:

    **Purchase Summary:**

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW purchase_summary AS 
        SELECT
            item_id,
            SUM(purchase_price) as revenue,
            COUNT(id) AS orders,
            SUM(quantity) AS items_sold
        FROM purchases GROUP BY 1;
    ```

    **Item Summary:** _(Using purchase summary and pageview summary internally)_

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW item_summary AS
        SELECT
            items.name,
            purchase_summary.items_sold,
            purchase_summary.orders,
            purchase_summary.revenue,
            item_pageviews.pageviews,
            CASE WHEN item_pageviews.pageviews IS NULL THEN 0.0 ELSE purchase_summary.orders / item_pageviews.pageviews::FLOAT END AS conversion_rate
        FROM items
        JOIN purchase_summary ON purchase_summary.item_id = items.id
        JOIN item_pageviews ON item_pageviews.item_id = items.id;
    ```

    This view shows some of the JOIN capabilities of Materialize, we're joining our two previous views with items to create a summary of purchases, pageviews, and conversion rates.

    If you select from `item_summary` you can see the results in real-time:

    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM item_summary ORDER BY conversion_rate DESC LIMIT 10;
    ```

    **Remaining Stock:** This view joins items and (all purchases created _after_ an item's inventory was updated) and creates a column that subtracts quantity_sold from inventory to get a live in-stock count.

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW remaining_stock AS
        SELECT
          items.id as item_id,
          MAX(items.inventory) - SUM(purchases.quantity) AS remaining_stock
        FROM items
        JOIN purchases ON purchases.item_id = items.id AND purchases.created_at > items.inventory_updated_at
        GROUP BY items.id;
    ```

    **Trending Items:** Here we are doing a bit of a hack because Materialize doesn't yet support window functions like `RANK`. So instead we are doing a self join on `purchase_summary` and counting up the items with _more purchases than the current item_ to get a basic "trending" rank datapoint.

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW trending_items AS
        SELECT
            p1.item_id,
            SUM(CASE WHEN p2.items_sold > p1.items_sold THEN 1 ELSE 0 END) as trend_rank
        FROM purchase_summary p1
        FULL JOIN purchase_summary p2 ON 1 = 1
        GROUP BY 1;
    ```

    Lastly, let's bring the trending items and remaining stock views together to expose to our graphql API:

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW item_metadata AS
        SELECT
            rs.item_id as id, rs.remaining_stock, ti.trend_rank
        FROM remaining_stock rs
        JOIN trending_items ti ON ti.item_id = rs.item_id;
    ```

    Now if you run `SHOW VIEWS;` you should see all the views we just created:

    ```
    materialize=> SHOW VIEWS;
       name       
    ------------------
    item_metadata
    item_pageviews
    item_summary
    purchase_summary
    remaining_stock
    trending_items
    (6 rows)
    ```

9. Now you've materialized some views that we can use in a business intelligence tool, metabase, and in a graphQL API (postgraphile.) Close out of the Materialize CLI (<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>D</kbd>).

## Business Intelligence: Metabase

1. In a browser, go to <localhost:3030> _(or <IP_ADDRESS:3030> if running on a VM)._

2. Click **Let's get started**.

3. Complete the first set of fields asking for your email address. This
    information isn't crucial for anything but does have to be filled in.

4. On the **Add your data** page, fill in the following information:

    Field             | Enter...
    ----------------- | ----------------
    Database          | **Materialize**
    Name              | **shop**
    Host              | **materialized**
    Port              | **6875**
    Database name     | **materialize**
    Database username | **materialize**
    Database password | Leave empty.

5. Proceed past the screens until you reach your primary dashboard.

6. Click **Ask a question**.

7. Click **Native query**.

8. From **Select a database**, select **shop**.

9. In the query editor, enter:

    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM item_summary ORDER BY conversion_rate DESC;
    ```

10. You can save the output and add it to a dashboard, once you've drafted a dashboard you can manually set the refresh rate to 1 second by adding `#refresh=1` to the end of the URL, here is an example of a real-time dashboard of top-viewed items and top converting items:
![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11527560/111679085-5228a780-87f7-11eb-86c5-34bf7b6cdcfb.gif)

## GraphQL API: Postgraphile

Postgraphile is running as middleware that connects to materialize (as if it were a postgres database) and exposes a graphql API to port 5000.

1. In a browser, go to <localhost:5000/graphiql> _(or <IP_ADDRESS:5000/graphiql> if running on a VM)._
2. This exposes an interactive UI for composing and creating graphql queries, you can use the toggles on the sidebar to create your own query, or you can paste one in like:

```graphql
query MyQuery {
allItemMetadata(first: 10, orderBy: TREND_RANK_ASC) {
    edges {
    node {
        id
        remainingStock
        trendRank
    }
    }
}
}
```

This query is fetching from our realtime materialized view called `item_metadata` and grabbing the top 10 items by trend_rank.

![postgraphile](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11527560/111680390-8c467900-87f8-11eb-940a-3c95fd7792d2.png)

## Conclusion

You now have materialize doing real-time materialized views on a changefeed from a database and pageview events from kafka. You have complex multi-layer views doing JOIN's and aggregations in order to distill the raw data into a form that's useful for downstream applications: metabase and graphQL.

In metabase, you have the ability to create dashboards and reports using the real-time data. And you can use the graphQL API to query real-time data from your website or other client applications.

You have a lot of infrastructure running in docker containers, don't forget to run `docker-compose down` to shut everything down!
